NEONATAL HIPOTERMIA AND NEONATAL ANOXIA

Introduction
Therapeutic hypothermia is a neuroprotective strategy who reduces mortality, and disability of newborns’ with encephalopathy Hypoxic-Ischemic from asphyxia perinatal. The therapy should start within the first six hours after birth and consists of reducing the body temperature of neonates (average of 33ºC - 34ºC degrees) for 72 hours4,6,7. Hypothermia reduces brain metabolism by approximately 5 % for every 1°C decrease in temperature of the body, which delayed the onset of cellular anoxic depolarization8.

Objective
The goal of this study reported two clinical cases describing the effects of neonatal hypothermia in babies with perinatal asphyxia and motor development in a follow-up program after hospital discharge.

Methods
	This is a retrospective case report involving two children diagnosed with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy due to neonatal asphyxia and submitted to a hypothermia protocol in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). Data regarding the prenatal, perinatal, and postnatal periods were collected from the children's medical records. Subsequently, an interview with the guardian was conducted using a semi-structured maternal history guide, including general information about the mother and baby. The children were followed up in the high-risk outpatient clinic and evaluated using the Hammersmith Neurological Examination (HINE), motor development assessment using the Alberta Infant Motor Scale [AIMS], and the Denver II screening test. The instruments were administered according to the recommendations in the assessment manuals and were administered by trained evaluators. The study was approved by the University's Research Ethics Committee.

Case description
Newborn, woman, born by cesarean section at 37 weeks of gestational age, weighing 3.055g and length of 46,5cm. The patient presented an Apgar score of 5 and 6 in the first and fifth minutes, respectively, requiring a cycle of PPV. The infant evolved with respiratory distress; thus, 20% oxygen was delivery for 1 (one) hour, followed by 3 (three) hours of CPAP. After 4 hours of life the patient presented worsening of respiratory distress and the presence of cyanosis in the extremities, being intubated and during intubation she presented an episode of hyperextension of the upper limbs, internal rotation of the wrists and seizure. Due to the tests which showed perinatal asphyxia, the therapeutic hypothermia protocol was started, turning off the crib until the patient reached the ideal temperature 32° - 35°C, being monitored every 20min., and remaining for 74 (seventy-four) hours. The baby was diagnosed with late neonatal sepsis in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit and required 6 (six) days of antibiotics. “Transfontanellary ultrasound” was performed, indicating a reduction of the sulci and diffuse hyperechogenicity. After seven days, a Cranial Magnetic Resonance (CMR) demonstrated a sequelae of severe perinatal “hypoxic-ischemic event”. The patient remained 12 days in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) and 10 days in the ward, being discharged with a diet by breast and milk formula. In the neurological examination at discharge, the patient presented mild hypotonia generalized and primitive reflexes present and symmetrical (search reflex, palm and plantar handgrip and complete moro and tonic-cervical reflex present). Currently, the child has a chronological age of 3 years and 3 months, and evaluations conducted by the physiotherapy team at the pediatric outpatient clinic will demonstrate motor development within the normal range for the age

Conclusion
The cases presented involved two children diagnosed with encephalopathy hypoxic-ischemic due to perinatal asphyxia that received a therapeutic protocol of hypothermia for 74 hr with strict monitoring of body temperature. They were followed up at the outpatient clinic by the multidisciplinary team and in the assessment of motor development, it was observed that both patients had normal motor development. The results obtained are favorable for the use of the neonatal hypothermia protocol as a “neuroprotective intervention” in babies with perinatal asphyxia minimizing and preventing sequelae in children's motor development

References
MACHADO, Ionara Lucena; LAVOR, Maria Francielze Holanda. Prevalência de asfixia perinatal em recém-nascidos de termo em maternidade de referência terciária e principais disfunções orgânicas associadas. Revista de Medicina UFC, Fortaleza, v. 58, n. 3, p. 10-14, jul./set. 2018.
BURNS, Dennis Alexander Rabelo et al. Tratado de Pediatria: Sociedade Brasileira de Pediatria, 4 ed. Barueri, SP, 2017.
YILDIZ, Edibe Pembegül; EKICI, Barış; TATLI, Burak. Neonatal hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy: an update on disease pathogenesis and treatment. Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics, New York, v. 06, n. 13 . 2017. DOI DOI: 10.1080/14737175.2017.1259567. Disponível em: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14737175.2017.1259567. Acesso em: 12 ago. 2022.
AZZOPARDI, Denis; STROHM, Brenda; MARLOW, Neil; BROCKLEHURST, Peter; DEIERL, Aniko; EDDAMA, Oya; GOODWIN, Julia; HALLIDAY, Henry L.; THE NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL O F MEDICINE, Edmund. Effects of Hypothermia for Perinatal Asphyxia on Childhood Outcomes. The new england journal of medicine, [s. l.], v. 371, n. 2, 10 jul. 2014.
LAPTOOK, Abbot R.; SHANKARAN, Seetha; TYSON, Jon E.; MUNOZ, Breda; BELL, Edward F.; GOLDBERG, Ronald N.; PARIKH, Nehal A. Effect of Therapeutic Hypothermia Initiated After 6 Hours of Age on Death or Disability Among Newborns With Hypoxic-Ischemic Encephalopathy: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA, [s. l.], v. 318, ed. 16, p. 1550-1560, 24 out. 2017. DOI doi:10.1001/jama.2017.14972. Disponível em: https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2658322. Acesso em: 14 ago. 2022.
THAYYIL, Sudhin; PANT, , Stuti; MONTALDO, Paolo; SHUKLA, Deepika; OLIVEIRA, Vania; IVAIN, , Phoebe. Hypothermia for moderate or severe neonatal encephalopathy in low-income and middle-income countries (HELIX): a randomised controlled trial in India, Sri Lanka, and Bangladesh. The Lancet, [s. l.], v. 9, 1 set. 2021.
ABATE, Biruk Beletew et al. Effects of therapeutic hypothermia on death among asphyxiated neonates with hypoxic-ischemicencephalopathy: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controltrials. PloSone, v. 16, n. 2, p. e0247229, 2021. 
SILVEIRA, Rita C.; PROCIANOY, Renato S. Hypothermiatherapy for newborns with hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy. Jornal de Pediatria (Versão em Português), v. 91, n. 6, p. S78-S83, 2015.
